This bill fits a pattern: every time Congress wants to create a new monopoly covering some activity formerly open to all, or extend and increase an old monopoly, they apply the term “piracy” to the free activity that the monopoly will stamp out. So whenever you see anything described as “piracy” aside from the capturing of ships, watch out for your liberties! —Richard Stallman More information is available by following the links at the end of this page. The House of Representatives is about to vote on legislation that would grant sweeping new powers for trademark holders and undermine the rights of domain name holders, Internet users, and small businesses. H.R. 3028 “The Trademark Cyberpiracy Prevention Act of 1999” will also establish unprecedented ability for trademark holders to sue Internet users all around the world. And H.R. 32028 will undermine a fair and carefully crafted international consensus on the resolution of Internet name disputes. It's a bad bill and it should be stopped. The House of Representatives may vote on H.R. 3028 as early as Tuesday, October 26, 1999. There is a chance to stop HR 3028. It has very few sponsors and has moved quietly through Congress, mostly under the radar of organizations and businesses that have worked to promote the growth of the Internet. Also, Congress will soon break for Thanksgiving. But you have to act! It is vitally important for you to contact your Representative in Congress and explain politely but firmly that you hope that your Representative will VOTE AGAINST H.R. 3028. Here is a quick guide to Calling Your Congressman. “Hello, I'm a registered voter in the district of Congressman <name>. I'm calling because I hope he/she will vote against H.R. 3028, ‘The Cyberpiracy Act.’ I don't like cyberpirates, but I believe this bill will hurt ALL domain name holders on the Internet, including small businesses, noncommercial organizations and individuals. Will you please tell the Congressman that I asked him/her to vote against H.R. 3028? Thanks.” Here are all the things you just did in 30 seconds: